[Extension-docs] New Getting started with Chrome Extensions collection (#3328)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/docs/extensions/mv3/getstarted/development-basics/index.md

---
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'
title: 'Development basics'
subhead: 'Learn what the development of a Chrome extension will look like.'
description: 'What to expect during the development of a Chrome extension.'
date: 2022-08-10
# updated: 2022-06-13
---

## Overview {: #overview }

This page describes the extension development workflow. We will create a "Hello, Extensions"
example, load the extension locally, locate logs and errors and share other development
recommendations.

## Hello Extensions {: #build }

This extension will display “Hello Extensions” when the user clicks on the extension toolbar icon.

<figure>
{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/xjKRmWMgwMm7Kdf72bkj.png", 
alt="Hello extension", width="206", height="130", class="screenshot" %}
  <figcaption>
  Hello Extension popup
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Start by creating a new directory to store extension files. If you prefer, you can download the full
source code hosted on [Github][sample-hello-world].

Next, create a new file in this directory called `manifest.json` and add the following code:

> {% Label %}manifest.js:{% endLabel %}

Author: This was a personal choice. I agree with you that it looks redundant.

IMO code sample labels help developers that are jumping from code sample to code sample and creating files quickly.

But I also agree that the formatting probably should be addressed. Right now, it matches the [web.dev label](https://web.dev/handbook/web-dev-components/#labels).

I'm identifying three paths forward:
A. Remove the instruction that specifies the file name and leave the label to indicate how to name the file.
or
B. Remove the labels.
and
C. Request a better-formatted label.

Let me know how to proceed.

> {% Label %}manifest.js:{% endLabel %}

Reviewer: Please remove them. One of the 20% of things we have to follow is being consistent with the rest of dcc. Unfortunately, we're the only people who use this. Adopting it now mean adding to every code sample on dcc. 

(Given that it looks unformatted, I'm inclined to think it's a feature that the dcc builders didn't finish.)

```json
{
  "manifest_version": 3,
  "name": "Hello Extensions",
  "description": "Base Level Extension",
  "version": "1.0",
  "action": {
    "default_popup": "hello.html",
    "default_icon": "hello_extensions.png"
  }
}
```

This JSON object describes the extension's capabilities and configuration. For example, the `"action"` key 
declares the image Chrome should use as the action's icon and the HTML page to show in a popup when the action is clicked. You can download the icon [here][hello-icon]. 

For the popup, create a file named `hello.html`, and add the following code:

{% Label %}hello.html{% endLabel %}

``` html
<html>
  <body>
    <h1>Hello Extensions</h1>
  </body>
</html>
```

The extension now displays a popup when the extension action (toolbar icon) is clicked. Let's test
it on Chrome by loading it locally. Ensure all files are saved.

## Loading an unpacked extension {: #load-unpacked }

> To load an unpacked extension in developer mode, follow these steps:

Author: I usually try to follow the [introductory sentences for lists]https://developers.google.com/style/lists#introductory-sentences-for-lists) convention in the style guide.

IMO, I prefer to be more concise, so let's go with your suggestion.

> 1. Go to the Extension Management page by navigating to `chrome://extensions`.

Author: I use this term because I found it in the following documentation pages:
- [manifest - description](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/manifest/description/#:~:text=browser%27s%20extension%20management)
- [Give users options](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/options/#:~:text=extension%20management%20page)
- [manifest - name](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv2/manifest/name/#:~:text=Extension%20management%20UI)

Looking at the UI, the page does name it simply "Extensions", so I see where you are coming from.

<img width="800" alt="Screen Shot 2022-09-09 at 11 06 36" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/37001393/190209062-67d9f762-0780-435e-b4ac-e9ad42fa49c0.png">

My only concern is that we call "extension pages" to refer to HTML pages included in the extension package.

Before making all these changes, I'd like to consult the team to ensure we all agree on this term change and perhaps start building a Chrome Extension Glossary that will eventually live on the docs.

> 1. Go to the Extension Management page by navigating to `chrome://extensions`.

Reviewer: Does extension pages refer generically to all pages used in an extension? In other words, is it a super set of content and popup pages?

> 1. Go to the Extension Management page by navigating to `chrome://extensions`.

Author: In the [Extension Architecture](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/architecture-overview/#files), we use extension pages to refer to any HTML page included in the extension (index.html, popup.html, onboarding.html, etc).

I found this [Google support on managing extensions](https://support.google.com/chrome_webstore/answer/2664769?hl=en#zippy=%2Cinstall-on-your-phone%2Cinstall-with-enhanced-safe-browsing), and it looks like you might be right about calling it simply "Extensions" page.

I think you won me over on this one. I'll make the changes.

> 1. Go to the Extension Management page by navigating to `chrome://extensions`.

Reviewer: Let's leave it for now. Giving something a different name in documentation than it has in the interface is not a best practice. Long term, we need to find another way to disambiguate these two items.

    - Alternatively, click on the Extensions menu puzzle button and select **Manage Extensions** at the bottom of the menu.
    - Or, click on the Chrome menu, hovering over **More Tools,** then select **Extensions**.
2. Enable Developer Mode by clicking the toggle switch next to **Developer mode**.
3. Click the **Load unpacked** button and select the extension directory.
    <figure>
    {% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/BzVElZpUtNE4dueVPSp3.png", alt="Chrome Extension Management page", 
    width="400", height="183",  class="screenshot" %}

      <figcaption>
      Chrome Management (chrome://extensions)
      </figcaption>
    </figure>

Ta-da! The extension has been successfully installed. Because no extension icons were included in
the manifest, a generic icon will be created for the extension.

## Pinning the extension {: #pin }

> By default, when you load your extension locally, it will appear in the **extensions menu** {% Img

Author: You have a point, in the past I have mostly have used this for procedures.
I think my choice was purely visual, bolded seemed to look better next to the puzzle icon. 

#### Bolded
<img width="400" alt="pinning bold" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/37001393/189449494-1df7e2c8-515f-43c1-aea7-7722d5d09426.png">

#### Unbolded
<img width="400" alt="pinning unbold" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/37001393/189449518-010605f2-85eb-4177-84ec-8ebe6c0bf7c0.png">

But, I could go either way.

> By default, when you load your extension locally, it will appear in the **extensions menu** {% Img

Reviewer: Then please unbold it. Generally, don't vary from standard practice unless there's an exceptional reason to do so.

> By default, when you load your extension locally, it will appear in the **extensions menu** {% Img

Author: Unbolding to follow standard practice 😌

To learn more about debugging the service worker, options page, and content scripts, see [Debugging
extensions][doc-debug].

## Structuring an extension project {: #structure }

There are many ways to structure an extension project; however, you must place the
manifest.json file in the extension's **root directory**. The following is a structure example:

```text/1
└── my-extension/
    ├── manifest.json
    ├── background.js
    ├── scripts/
    │   └── content.js
    │   └── react.production.min.js
    ├── popup/
    │   └── popup.html
    │   └── popup.js
    │   └── popup.css
    └── images/
        ├── icon-16.png
        ├── icon-32.png
        ├── icon-48.png
        └── icon-128.png
```

## Using Typescript {: #types }

If you are developing using a [code editor][mdn-ide] such as VSCode or Atom, you can use the npm
package [chrome-types][npm-chrome-types] to take advantage of auto-completion for the [Chrome
API][doc-apis]. This npm package is updated automatically when the Chromium source code
changes.

{% Aside  'gotchas' %}

Upgrade this npm package frequently to work with the latest Chromium version.

> {% endAside %}

Author: > {% Aside  'gotchas' %}
> 
> Upgrade this npm package frequently to work with the latest Chromium version.
> 
> {% endAside %}
> 

@jpmedley I had to change this to gotchas, because we don't have important in this repo yet. See [Issue#3380](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com/issues/3380)

> 💡 **TIP**: Upgrade this npm package frequently to work with the latest Chromium version.

Author: Good point! 👍

## 🚀 Ready to start building? {: #building }

Choose any of the following step-by-step tutorials to begin your extension learning journey. 

| Extension                        | What you will learn                                                     |
|----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Reading time][tut-reading-time] | To insert an element on every page automatically.                       |
| [Focus Mode][tut-focus-mode]     | To run code on the current page after clicking on the extension action. |
| [Tabs Manager][tut-tabs-manager] | To create a popup that manages browser tabs.                            |

As a bonus, these tutorials were designed to improve your experience when reading the Chrome

> extension and Chrome Web store documentation.

Author: Good point I'll explain in more detail.

---
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'
title: 'Development basics'
subhead: 'Learn what the development of a Chrome extension will look like.'
description: 'What to expect during the development of a Chrome extension.'
date: 2022-08-10
# updated: 2022-06-13
---

## Overview {: #overview }

This page describes the extension development workflow. We will create a "Hello, Extensions"
example, load the extension locally, locate logs and errors and share other development
recommendations.

## Hello Extensions {: #build }

This extension will display “Hello Extensions” when the user clicks on the extension toolbar icon.

<figure>
{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/xjKRmWMgwMm7Kdf72bkj.png", 
alt="Hello extension", width="206", height="130", class="screenshot" %}
  <figcaption>
  Hello Extension popup
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Start by creating a new directory to store extension files. If you prefer, you can download the full

> source code hosted on [Github][sample-hello-world].

Author: Good point! Adding this change to my next commit.

> Next, create a new file called `manifest.json` and add the following code:

Author: I like it! Adding this change on my next commit.

By default, when you load your extension locally, it will appear in the **extensions menu** {% Img
src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/f5i7AgfauCfoQJxnn3kU.png", alt="Puzzle", width="24",
height="24" %}. Pin your extension to the toolbar to quickly access your extension during
development.

<figure>
{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/LahIugYHQW3QpHM0z1qZ.png", 
alt="Pinning the extension", width="358", height="248", class="screenshot" %}
  <figcaption>
  Pinning the extension
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Click on the extension’s action (toolbar icon); you should see a popup.

<figure>
{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/xjKRmWMgwMm7Kdf72bkj.png", 
alt="hello world extension", width="206", height="130", class="screenshot" %}
  <figcaption>
  Hello World extension
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Reloading the extension {: #reload }

Let’s go back to the code and change the content of the `H1` element in your HTML file.

{% Label %}hello.html{% endLabel %}

```html
<html>
 <body>
   <h1>Hello Extensions of the world! 👋</h1>
 </body>
</html>
```

After saving the file, go to the Extension Management page. You can see the changes made by clicking

> on the refresh icon next to the **on/off** toggle:

Author: You are right! I struggled to keep the example simple, plus at the same time, introduce development workflow concepts. You got me there! I was trying to avoid adding a service worker in this example. 

I'd be open to conversing about this further.

> on the refresh icon next to the **on/off** toggle:

Author: ### Here's the breakdown

**Do not require extension reload**
- Popup HTML
- Scripts inside the HTML
- Options HTML page
- Other extension HTML pages.

**Require extension reload**
- Content scripts declared in the manifest (extension reload & host page refresh).
- Manifest
- Service worker

### Moving forward

- Modify the manifest name instead of the popup <H1> tag.
- Add a details component including which components require the extension to be refreshed.

> on the refresh icon next to the **on/off** toggle:

Author: [See preview](https://deploy-preview-3328--developer-chrome-com.netlify.app/docs/extensions/mv3/getstarted/development-basics/#reload)

{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/QNtwZICbwsGO3gacCJEd.png", 
alt="Reload an extension", width="500", height="233", class="screenshot" %}

{% Aside %}

💡 **TIP**: Remember to refresh your extension every time you make changes.

{% endAside %}

## Finding console logs and errors {: #logs }

### Console logs {: #console}

During development, you can debug your code by accessing the browser console logs. In this case, we
will locate the logs for the popup. Start by adding a script tag to `hello.html`.

{% Label %}hello.html{% endLabel %}

```html
<html>
 <head>
   </head>
 <body>
   <h1>Hello Extensions of the world! 👋/h1>
   <script src="popup.js"></script>
 </body>
</html>
```

Create a `popup.js` file and add the following code to output the log to the console:

{% Label %}popup.js{% endLabel %}

```js
console.log("This is a popup!")
```

To see this message logged in the Console, complete the following steps:

  1. Refresh the extension
  2. Open the popup
  3. Right-click on the popup

>   4. Select **Inspect**. 

Reviewer 2: As a general nit, please review period use in unordered and ordered lists for consistency. I don't have a strong preference on whether list items should or should not end with periods, but we should be more consistent about what pattern we use and we should definitely stay consistent within a single list.

For example, items 4 and 5 are the only items in this list that end with periods.

Author: Um yes, I missed this 😳... I think I rewrote this list a few times and failed to capture those elusive periods... Thanks for catching this! Adding this to my next commit

Reviewer: Ask me about this some time. The actual rule on this is more complicated.

        </figcaption>
      </figure>
  5. In the [DevTools][dev-tools], navigate to the **Console** panel.
    <figure>
    {% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/1ZrcBEYcbMxW1c9UvBy9.png", 
    alt="DevTools Code Panel", width="400", height="374", class="screenshot" %}
      <figcaption>
      DevTools Console Panel 
      </figcaption>
    </figure>

### Error logs {: #errors }

Now let's break the extension. We can do so by removing the closing quote in the `popup.js` file:

{% Label %}popup.js{% endLabel %}

```js
console.log("This is a popup!) // broken code
```

Go to the Extension Management page and open the popup. An **Errors** button will appear.

{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/a9lAHCJZZrebOSKrkPRD.png", 
alt="Extension Management page with error button", width="300", height="226", class="screenshot" %}

Click on the **Errors** button to learn more about the error:

{% Img src="image/BhuKGJaIeLNPW9ehns59NfwqKxF2/GrorLyaC6nRAyqc1qULC.png", 
alt="Extension error details", width="400", height="281", class="screenshot" %}

To learn more about debugging the service worker, options page, and content scripts, see [Debugging
extensions][doc-debug].

> ## Structuring an extension project {: #structure }

Author: ```text
└── my-extension/
    ├── manifest.json
    ├── background.js
    ├── scripts/
```
@rachelandrew Do you have any thoughts on directory trees and screen readers?

> ## Structuring an extension project {: #structure }

Author: I've had two suggestions: 

1. Use bullets

<img width="430" alt="Screen Shot 2022-09-16 at 11 05 49" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/37001393/190682251-f33496c7-a0bf-400b-a16c-4f155946b74a.png">

2. Use a screenshot and include an alt-text

Challenge with second approach is the 100 chars limitation.

> ## Structuring an extension project {: #structure }

Reviewer: alt="The contents of an extension folder: manifest.json, background.js, scripts folder, popup folder, and images folder."

Question: does a reader need to know every item in these folders at this point, or can that be covered when you get into specifics?

> There are many ways to structure an extension project; however, you should always place the
> manifest.json file at the **root**. The following is a structure example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many ways to structure an extension project; however, you must place the
manifest.json file in the extension's **root directory**. The following is a structure example:
```

> ```text

Reviewer 2: Might want to add an annotation to highlight the manifest.json line. I think this should work, but please test.

````suggestion
```text/1
````

Author: I tested this, and it works! Great suggestion! 😄

└── my extension/
    ├── manifest.json
    ├── background.js
    ├── scripts/
    │   └── content.js

>     │   └── jquery-min.js

Reviewer 2: jQuery feels a bit dated. Might be best to replace it with something like React.js.

```suggestion
    │   └── react.production.min.js
```
